'9\nCharacters\nGreat heroes are more than a collection \nof statistics and numbers, but in a game \nsystem this is certainly where they begin. \nTo make your hero, download a Savage \nWorlds character sheet from our website at \nwww.peginc.com and follow the steps below.\nConcept\nPublished Savage Settings often come with \nboth character ideas and pregenerated \n“Archetypes.” You can play these as-is or use \nthem to spark your own ideas.\nYou might play an iconic gunslinger in \nDeadlands: The Weird West, for example, or \nyou might try something a little different \nand play the innocent schoolmarm destined \nto save the town. Look through the player’s \nsection of your setting or talk to the GM if it’s \na world of her own creation to see what kind \nof character catches your interest.\nRace\nSettings may feature everything from \nhumans to strange aliens, graceful elves, or \nother exotic races. You can choose to play any \nrace available in your particular setting.\nA number of sample races are detailed on \npages 12 through 17, as well as rules for \nplayers and Game Masters to create their own.Hindrances\nHindrances are flaws, drawbacks, or dark \nsecrets drawn from a character’s backstory.\nYou can take up to 4 points of Hindrances. \nA Major Hindrance is worth 2 points, and \na Minor is worth 1. A hero could thus take \ntwo Major Hindrances, four Minor, or any \ncombination that adds up to 4 points. (You \ncan take more Hindrances if you want but the \nmaximum benefit is 4 points!)\nTaking Hindrances not only helps you \ndefine and roleplay your hero, but also gives \nyou additional points you can use to start \nwith additional attribute or skill points, Edges, \nor even money for gear.\nFor 2 points you can:\n• Raise an attribute one die type, or\n• Choose an Edge\nFor 1 point you can:\n• Gain another skill point, or\n• Gain additional starting funds equal to \ntwice your setting’s starting amount.\nTraits\nCharacters are defined by attributes and skills, \ncollectively called “Traits,” and both work in \nexactly the same way. Attributes and skills \nare ranked by die types, typically from d4 \nto d12, with d6 being the average for adult \nhumans. Higher is better!Chapter One10\nSAVAGE WORLDSAttributes\nEvery character starts with a d4 in each \nof five attributes: Agility, Smarts, Spirit, \nStrength, and Vigor (discussed in more detail \non page 29).\nYou then have 5 points to increase your \nattributes. Raising a d4 to a d6, for example, \ncosts 1 point. You’re free to spend these points \nhowever you like, except that no attribute \nmay ever be raised above a d12 unless a racial \nability says otherwise (such as Attribute \nIncrease, page 18). If it does, each increase \nbeyond a d12 adds a +1 modifier. Increasing \na d12 Strength two steps, for example, is a \nStrength score of d12 + 2 .Skills\nSkills are learned abilities such as firing \nweapons, hand-to-hand combat, scientific \nknowledge, professional aptitudes, and so on.\nSkills in Savage Worlds are very broad to \nkeep the action simple and straightforward. \nThe Shooting skill, for example, covers all \ntypes of guns, bows, rocket launchers, and \nother ranged weapons.\nCore Skills: Five skills are marked with a \nred star in the list that begins on page 29: \nAthletics, Common Knowledge, Notice, \nPersuasion, and Stealth. These are “innate” \nabilities most adult adventurers have. \nUnless a racial ability (page 18), Edge, or \nHindrance says otherwise, your character \nstarts with a d4 in each of these five core skills.\nBuying Skills:  After core skills are assigned, \nyou have 12 additional points to raise core \nskills or buy and raise new skills as you see fit.\nEach die type costs 1 point (starting at d4) \nas long as the skill is equal to or less than the \nattribute it’s linked to (listed beside the skill \nin parentheses, in the list starting on page \n58). If you exceed the linked attribute, the \ncost becomes 2 points per die type.\nSkill Maximums: Skills may not be \nincreased above d12 during character creation \nunless the character’s race starts with the skill \nat d6. If the skill starts with a d6, increase her \nmaximum to d12 + 1. Celestials  (page 21) \nstart with a d6 in Faith, for example, which \nmeans their Faith skill may be increased to \nd12 + 1.\nDerived Statistics\nYour character sheet contains a few other \nstatistics you need to fill in, described below.\nPace is how fast your character moves in \ntactical situations like combat. Standard Pace \nis 6, which means six tabletop inches per \ngame round. Each inch is two yards in the \nreal world. Movement is explained in detail \non page 92.\nParry is equal to 2 plus half your character’s \nFighting die type (a total of 2 if a character \ndoesn’t have Fighting), plus any bonuses for \nshields or certain weapons. This is the Target \nNumber (TN) to hit your hero in hand-to-\nhand combat.\nRed\nNo matter what setting \nshe’s playing, Emily’s \ncharacter is always “Red.”\nRed takes on different \naspects when she wanders \ndifferent worlds, but is \nalways Strong, Smart, \nand loyal to her friends.\nShe’s also curious…a trait \nthat constantly seems to \nget her in trouble…\nRoman Centurion…\nThese guys mean \nbusiness!\n11 CharaC ter SFor Fighting skills higher than d12, such as \nd12+1, add half the fixed modifier, rounded \ndown. For instance, Fighting d12 + 1  grants \na Parry of 8, while Fighting d12 + 2  results in \na Parry of 9.\nSize: A hero’s default Size is 0 unless altered \nby racial abilities, Edges, or Hindrances. It \ncannot be less than −1 or more than +3.\nToughness is your hero’s damage thres-\nhold. Damage rolls that equal or exceed \nthis number cause harm (explained later in \nChapter Three).\nToughness is 2 plus half your hero’s Vigor, \nplus Armor (use the armor worn on his \ntorso—see page 69). Vigor over a d12 is \ncalculated just like Parry, above.\nEdges\nAttributes and skills are a character’s \nbasic statistics, but what really makes \nindividuals different are their Edges. Even \ntwo legionaries in Weird Wars \nRome with identical Traits play \nvastly different depending on \nthe Edges they take. One might \nfocus on Leadership Edges that lets \nhim rally his fellow soldiers while \nanother concentrates on taking \nout large numbers of foes at \nonce with Sweep or Frenzy.\nCharacters get Edges \nby taking Hindrances  \n(see page 9), from \nracial abilities (such as \nHumans’ Adaptability, \npage 16), or Advances  \nonce play begins (page 54).\nA comprehensive list of \nEdges starts on page 37. Your \nsetting book likely has addi-\ntional abilities specific to \nthat world or genre as well.\nGear\nSome settings provide your \nhero with all the gear she \nneeds. Most simply grant a starting \namount of funds you can use to \npurchase whatever you like from \na relevant list of weapons, \narmor, and adventuring gear.Unless your setting book or GM says \notherwise, the standard starting amount is \n$500. A list of common gear and weapons can \nbe found in Chapter Two. \nDepending on the setting, this might be \neverything the character owns or it may \nrepresent their “adventuring” gear, with their \nmore mundane belongings stored at a home \nor apartment. The latter is up to the Game \nMaster. In modern settings, most everyone \nshould have a home, clothes, appliances, \nand so on. The equipment you list on your \ncharacter sheet should be your character’s \n“adventuring gear” rather than an exhaustive \nlist of everything she owns.\nPlayers don’t have to worry about how \nmuch they can carry in most games, but if \nit becomes important, see Encumbrance on \npage 67.\nBackground Details\nFinish your new hero by filling in any \nadditional history or background you care \nto. Ask yourself why she’s where she is and \nwhat her goals are. Where does she live? \nDoes she have any close friends or family \nwho might be relevant to the game?\nOr just start playing and fill in these \ndetails as they become important \nand you walk around in her \nshoes a bit.\nYou might also want to talk \nto the other players. Maybe \nyour characters know each \nother right from the start. \nOr you might col-\nlectively decide to \noptimize your group \na bit and ensure you’ve got \na good assortment of skills \nand abilities. If so, make sure \nyou’re playing what you want \nto play. There’s no point in \nbeing the party’s healer if that’s \nnot a role you’re interested in.\nAlter as needed for \nandroid soldiers, \nminers, entertainers, \nor whatever .\n12\nSAVAGE WORLDSRaces\nNot every hero is human. Below are sample \nraces common to many science fiction and \nfantasy settings. Use them as they are or \nmodify them to fit your particular world. \nAfter these examples are guidelines for \ncreating your own races as well.\nNote that the races allude to a lot of rules \nwe haven’t explained yet. Just skim them for \nnow and come back once you’ve got a grasp \non the rest of the game.\nAndroid\nAndroids are semi-organic beings created \nby advanced technology. The example \nhere mimics humans in most ways and \ncan generally pass for them when desired \n(and not examined by a physician). Their \nadvanced neural network gives them artificial \nintelligence complete with individual \npersonalities, quirks, and emotions just like \nany other sapient being.\nThe android version presented here is a \ngeneric model. To create more specialized \nandroids, use the custom racial abilities \nstarting on page 18.\n \x84PACIFIST ( Major ): Unless the \nandroid is designed for \ncombat, most advanced \nsoc ieties require the \ninstal lation of “ Asimov \nCircuits,” a concept based \non science fiction writer Isaac \nAsimov’s “First Law of Robotics.” \nThe artificial being may not injure \na sapient being, or through action \nor inaction, allow such a being to \nbe harmed. This gives them the \nPacifist (Major) Hindrance. \x84CONSTRUCT:  Androids add +2 to recover \nfrom being Shaken, don’t breathe, ignore \none level of Wound modifiers, and are \nimmune to poison and disease. Constructs \ncannot heal naturally. Healing one requires \nthe Repair skill, which takes one hour per \ncurrent Wound level per attempt and is \nnot limited to the “ Golden Hour” (see \npage 96).\n \x84OUTSIDER (Major ): Androids subtract 2 \nfrom Persuasion rolls when interacting \nwith anyone besides other androids, and \nhave no legal rights in most areas (they’re \ngenerally considered property).\n \x84VOW ( Major ): Constructs are designed \nwith a particular purpose. Player character \nconstructs have broad directives such \nas serving a particular corporation or \npolitical faction. This acts as a Major Vow \nto that particular directive. If this ever \ncauses a conflict of interest, the player and \nGM must figure out what the construct’s \nprogramming requires.\n13 CharaC ter SAquarian\nFrom the crushing ocean depths \ncome aquatic folk. They are thick \nand sturdy beneath the waves but \noften vulnerable in the dry air or \nsearing heat of the surface.\n \x84AQUATIC:  Aquarians cannot drown \nin water and move at their full Pace \nwhen swimming. See Movement on page \n92 for normal swimming rates.\n \x84DEPENDENCY:  Aquarians must immerse them-\nselves in water one hour out of every 24 or become \nautomatically Fatigued each day until they are \nIncapacitated. The day after Incapacitation from \ndehydration, they perish. Each hour spent in water \nrestores one level of Fatigue.\n \x84LOW LIGHT VISION:  Aquarians are used to the darkness \nof the depths. They ignore penalties for Dim and Dark \nIllumination.\n \x84TOUGHNESS:  Life in the depths of their watery worlds has \nmade aquarian flesh tough and resilient. Add +1 to \ntheir Toughness.\nAvion\nAvions are humanoids \nwith wings. They tend to \nbe very slight of build owing \nto their hollow bones. Some are \nfeathered while others are leathery \nor even scaled.\n\u2002\x84CAN’T SWIM:  Avions’ wings are \na hazard in water. They subtract 2 from \nAthletics (swimming) rolls and each inch moved in \nwater costs them 3″ of Pace.\n\u2002\x84FLIGHT: Avions fly at Pace 12 per round. Use Athletics \nwhen maneuvering.\n\u2002\x84FRAIL: Avions have −1 Toughness due to their hollow \nbones.\n \x84KEEN SENSES:  Avions are more perceptive than most. \nThey begin with a d6 in Notice (instead of d4) and may \nraise the skill to d12 + 1.\n\u2002\x84REDUCED PACE:  Dependence on flight and bulky \nwings make avions slightly slower when walking. \nDecrease their walking Pace by 1 and their running die \nby one step.\n14\nSAVAGE WORLDSElve s\nElves are tall, thin souls with pointed ears and deep-set eyes of various colors. Whether they \nhail from the deep forests or hidden valleys, they are all born more graceful than humans, \nthough somewhat slighter. Most elves live upwards of 300 \nyears. They have fair skin and their hair includes all \nhuman colors, plus shades of silver, blue, and gold.\n\u2002\x84AGILE:  Elves are graceful and agile. They \nstart with a d6 in Agility instead of a d4. \nThis increases maximum Agility to \nd12 + 1.\n\u2002\x84ALL THUMBS:  Elves have an \ninherent dislike of mechanical \nobjects, and thus have the All \nThumbs Hindrance. They shun most \nmechanical items and designs.\n\u2002\x84LOW LIGHT VISION:  Elven eyes \namplify light. Other races often \nclaim they can see stars in the \nelves’ eyes. They ignore \npenalties for Dim and \nDark Illumination.Dwarves\nDwarves are short but stout, hardy people \nwho come from massive caverns or high \nmountains. They are a proud, warlike race, \nusually made so by frequent contact with \nhostile races such as orcs and goblins.\nDwarves usually live upwards of 200 years. \nIn most fantasy campaigns, they have ruddy \nskin and all human hair colors.\n \x84LOW LIGHT VISION:  Dwarven eyes are \naccustomed to the dark of the underearth. \nThey ignore penalties for Dim and Dark \nIllumination.\n \x84REDUCED PACE:  Dwarves have short legs \ncompared to most races. Decrease their \nPace by 1 and their running die one die \ntype.\n \x84TOUGH:  Dwarves are stout and tough. \nThey start with a d6 Vigor instead of a d4. \nThis increases maximum Vigor to d12 + 1.\n15 CharaC ter SHalf- Elve s\nHalf-elves gain the elves’ grace but none of their elegant frailty. \nMost are well-adjusted, but some are shunned by one side \nof the family or the other and grow resentful. Others may \neven be mistreated. Their lifespans are closer to their \nhuman parent than those of their elven kin, living \nonly to about 100 years.\n \x84HERITAGE:  Half-elves may retain \nthe grace of their elven parent or the \nadaptability of their human ancestry. \nA half-elf may either start with a \nfree Novice Edge of his choice \nor a d6 in Agility instead of a d4 \n(which also increases his Agility \nmaximum to d12 + 1).\n \x84LOW LIGHT VISION:  Half-elves \nignore penalties for Dim and \nDark Illumination.\n \x84OUTSIDER (Minor ): Half-elves \nare never quite comfortable in human \nor elven society, having a foot in both \nworlds but never fully standing in either. \nThey subtract 2 from Persuasion rolls with all but \nothers of their kind.\nHalf- Folk\nHalf-folk are small, nimble people with fuzzy \nbrown or black hair. Though they are \nfrail compared to most other races, their \ncheerful optimism (or wily cunning) gives \nthem a “never say die” attitude that makes \nthem more than a match for creatures \ntwice their size. Half-folk see no reason \nto invite trouble and tend to live in their \nown close-knit communities far off the \nbeaten path.\n \x84LUCK:  Half-folk draw one additional \nBenny per game session.\n \x84REDUCED PACE:  Decrease the character’s \nPace by 1 and their running die one die type.\n \x84SIZE −1:  Half-folk average only about four feet tall, \nreducing their Size (and therefore Toughness) by 1.\n \x84SPIRITED:  Half-folk are generally optimistic beings. They \nstart with a d6 Spirit instead of a d4. This increases their \nmaximum Spirit to d12 + 1.\n16\nSAVAGE WORLDSRakashans\nRakashans are humanoid felines. Some have the bright colors of tigers, the speckled hides of \nleopards, or the exotic look of Siamese cats. All have sharp claws and teeth, and a cruel nature \nwhen it comes to dealing with their prey.\nRakashans can be found in their own remote and exotic cities or as fringe elements of normal \nsociety. They are often too clever and beautiful to be shunned, but too cunning to gain others’ \ncomplete trust.\n \x84AGILE: Feline grace gives rakashans a d6 Agility attribute instead of a d4. This increases \nmaximum Agility to d12 + 1.\n \x84BITE/CLAWS:  Rakashan fangs and claws are Natural Weapons (page \n104) that cause Strength+d4 damage.\n \x84BLOODTHIRSTY:  Rakashans can be cruel to their foes, often \ntoying with them for simple amusement. They rarely take \nprisoners and feel little compunction about punishing \ncaptured foes.\n \x84CAN’T SWIM:  Rakashans actually can swim, they just \nshun it and are not particularly good at it. They subtract 2 \nfrom Athletics (swimming) rolls and each tabletop inch of \nmovement in water uses 3″ of Pace.\n \x84LOW LIGHT VISION:  Rakashan eyes amplify light. They \nignore penalties for Dim and Dark Illumination.\n \x84RACIAL ENEMY:  Rakashan society rose at the expense of \nanother. Pick a common race in your setting. Members \nof each culture subtract 2 from Persuasion when \ndealing with each other and often attack on \nsight.Humans\nHumans in most settings get one free Edge \nof their choice. This option reflects their \nversatility and adaptability compared to most \nother races.\nFor more variety, the GM might give \nhumans abilities based on culture rather \nthan race. For instance, a nomadic, horse-\nbased society might start with skill points in \nRiding and Survival. Cultural templates are \ndesigned just like making new races, though \nGMs should allow for more exceptions than \nusual since the abilities tend to be learned \nrather than truly innate.\n \x84ADAPTABLE:  Humans begin play with any \nNovice Edge of their choosing. They must \nmeet its Requirements as usual.\n17 CharaC ter SSaurians\nLizard men typically come from steaming jungles or deep \ndeserts where they have unique civilizations unknown \nto other sentient races.\n \x84ARMOR +2:  Saurians have scaly skin \nthat acts as leather armor. \n \x84BITE:  A saurian’s fangs are Natural Weapons  \n(page 104) that cause Strength+d4 damage.\n \x84ENVIRONMENTAL WEAKNESS:  Though not truly \ncold-blooded, saurians are poorly suited for frigid \nconditions. They suffer a −4 penalty to resist cold \nenvironmental effects, and suffer +4 damage \nfrom cold-based attacks.\n \x84KEEN SENSES:  Saurians have acute senses, \ngiving them the Alertness Edge.\n \x84OUTSIDER (Minor ): Most races distrust saurians \nfor some reason. Perhaps it is their strange \nways and customs, their often-sibilant speech, \nor an ancient subconscious fear of their reptilian \nancestors. Saurians subtract 2 from Persuasion rolls with all but others of their kind.\nBreaking the Mold\nThe racial archetypes presented here are iconic of their usual appearance in fantasy and \nscience fiction, but players and Game Masters should feel free to break the tropes if they \nfit your particular setting.\nMaybe rakashans in your world have wings. Or aquarians are primitive, eight-armed \ncannibals who hunt more developed races on a post-apocalyptic water world.\nYou can also make different versions of the same races. Perhaps the rakashans of one \narea evolved to resist cold (they’re more like snow leopards), while another sprang from \ncheetahs (and have Fleet-Footed as a racial ability). The limit lies only in your imagination \nand desire to create something new and unusual!\n“I know a mad scientist who’s a lizard man and a \npacifist catgirl vegetarian. Don’t judge a book by \nits cover , friend, or a leopard-man by his spots.” —Red\n18\nSAVAGE WORLDSMaking Races\nGame Masters and players who want to make their own races (or cultural archetypes) can use \nthe system below. Our races are designed with the following rules:\n• Races and cultures begin with 2 points of Positive Racial Abilities. Additional positive \nabilities must be countered with an equal value of negative ones. A +2 ability, for example, \nmay be countered by a single −2 ability or two −1 abilities.\n• If you want to include an ability we haven’t included here, simply assign it a value based \non the examples below.\nNames: Don’t be afraid to rename abilities to give your setting more flavor. If you want your \nhorse nomads to have Riding skill at d6, for example, you might call it Born in the Saddle. It’s \nall about creating rich flavor rather than lists of abilities your players have to keep up with.\nPOSitiVe ra CiaL aBiLitieS\nThe number in parentheses after the name of each entry is the number of times the particular enhancement \nmay be taken. “U” means unlimited.\nVALUE ABILITY\n2Adaptable (1): The race has great variation among its people and cultures. Characters start \nwith a free Novice Edge of their choice (and must meet all the Edge’s Requirements).\n3Additional Action (1): The being has additional appendages, enhanced reflexes, or exceptional \neye-hand coordination. He may ignore 2 points of Multi-Action penalties each turn.\n1/2Aquatic/Semi-Aquatic (1): For one point the character is semi-aquatic and can hold his breath \nfor 15 minutes before checking for drowning. For two, he’s native to the water. He cannot drown \nin oxygenated liquid and moves his full Pace when swimming (see Movement, page 92).\n1Armor (3): The species has a thick hide or is encrusted in solid material like scaly plating or \neven rock. This grants Armor +2 each time it’s taken.\n2Attribute Increase (U): During character creation, the species increases a particular attribute \n(Agility, Smarts, Spirit, Strength, or Vigor) one die type. This increases the Trait’s maximum \nby one as well.\n1Bite (1): The race has fangs that cause Strength+d4 damage. See Natural Weapons, page \n104 for more information.\n1Burrowing (1): The species can burrow into loose earth and move through it at half normal \nPace (he cannot run). He cannot normally be attacked while burrowing, and can attempt to \nsurprise opponents who didn’t see him coming by making an opposed Stealth vs. Notice \nroll. If successful, the burrower adds +2 to his attack and damage rolls that round, or +4 with \na raise (he has The Drop, page 100).\n2/3/4Claws (1): The race has claws that cause Str+d4 damage. One more point may be spent to \nincrease their damage to Strength+d6, and/or another to add AP 2. See Natural Weapons, \npage 104 for more information.\n8Construct (1): Constructs are artificial beings made of inorganic material. They add +2 to \nrecover from being Shaken, ignore one level of Wound modifiers, don’t breathe, and are \nimmune to disease and poison. Wounds must be mended via the Repair skill. Each attempt \ntakes one hour per current Wound level and ignores the “Golden Hour”. Many Constructs \nhave the Dependency Negative Racial Ability (reflecting their need for a power source).\n2Doesn’t Breathe (1): The species does not breathe. Individuals aren’t affected by inhaled \ntoxins, can’t drown, and don’t suffocate in a vacuum. (They may still freeze, however.)\n2+XEdge (U): All members of this race have the same innate Edge chosen from those available \nin the setting. Unlike Adaptable, this ability ignores Requirements except other Edges. Each \nRank beyond Novice costs an additional point to a maximum of Heroic Rank (5).\n1Environmental Resistance (U): The species receives a +4 bonus to resist a single negative \nenvironmental effect, such as heat, cold, lack of air, radiation, etc. Damage from that source \nis also reduced by 4.\n19 CharaC ter S\n2/4/6Flight (1): The species can fly at Pace 6 (or 12 for 4 points) and “run” for extra movement \nas usual. For 6 points, the being can fly at Pace 24 and may “run” for 2d6″ of additional \nmovement. Maneuvering uses the Athletics skill. Racial flight presumes some kind of wings \nwhich can be targeted or fouled (a Bound or Entangled  character cannot fly).\n2 Hardy (1): A second Shaken result in combat does not cause a Wound.\n1/2Horns (1): The being has a horn or horns that cause Str+d4 damage (or Str+d6 for 2 points). \nSee Natural Weapons, page 104, for more information.\n1Immune to Poison or Disease (2): The species is immune to poison or disease (your choice). \nIt may be taken twice for both effects.\n1Infravision (1): The creature “sees” heat, either through eyes or other sensory organs. This \nhalves Illumination penalties when attacking warm targets (including invisible beings).\n2Leaper (1): The character can jump twice as far as listed under Movement, page 92. In \naddition, he adds +4 to damage when leaping as part of a Wild Attack instead of the usual \n+2 (unless in a closed or confined space where he cannot leap horizontally or vertically—\nGM’s call).\n1Low Light Vision (1): The being ignores penalties for Dim or Dark illumination (but not \nPitch Darkness).\n1No Vital Organs (1):  These species have hidden, extremely tough, or redundant vital \norgans. Called Shots do no extra damage against them.\n2 Pace (2): The character’s Pace is increased by +2 and his running die is increased a die type.\n1Parry (3): The creature’s natural Parry is increased by +1. This may be due to a prehensile \ntail, extra limbs, enhanced reflexes, or even latent psi-sense.\n1/3Poisonous Touch (1): With a successful Touch Attack (page 108), bite, or claw, the victim \nmust roll Vigor or suffer the effects of Mild Poison. For 3 points the poison can be upgraded \nto Knockout, Lethal, or Paralyzing instead, but each use causes the hero Fatigue. The \ncharacter may always choose whether or not to use her poison touch. See page 128 for \nPoison and its effects.\n2/1Power (U): The race has an innate ability that functions like a power (see page 147). For 2 \npoints, she has Arcane Background (Gifted) and a power that reflects her unusual ability. \nEach time this is taken after the first costs 1 point and grants another power. It does not \nincrease her Power Points—use the Power Points Edge for that.\n1Reach (3): Long limbs, tentacles, etc. grant the creature Reach +1 (add +1 each time it’s taken \nafter the first).\n2/3Regeneration (1):  The being heals damage quickly. She may make a natural healing \nroll once per day (rather than every five days). For 3 points, permanent injuries may be \nrecovered once all other Wounds are regenerated. Treat each injury as an additional Wound \nfor purposes of recovery (the being may try once per week).\n1Size +1 (3): The creature is larger than normal. Each point of Size adds directly to Toughness \nand increases maximum Strength one step. Large species may have difficulty using \nequipment designed for more traditional humanoids. See page 106 for more on Size.\n1/2Skill (1/skill): The character starts with a d4 in a skill inherent to her race or culture. For 2 \npoints (or 1 if already a core skill), it starts at d6 and the skill’s maximum increases to d12+1.\n1/2Skill Bonus (Once per Skill): Biological factors give the race a +1/+2 bonus when using \na particular skill. A race that emits pheromones, for example, might have a +1 bonus to \nPersuasion.\n1Sleep Reduction (2): The being needs half the normal amount of sleep as humans. If taken \na second time, the being never sleeps.\n2+XSuper Powers (1): The race has truly extraordinary abilities taken from the Savage Worlds \nSuper Powers Companion. The cost is 2—for Arcane Background (Super Powers)—plus the \nactual cost of the power selected (X). Make sure you have the GM’s permission before taking \nthis powerful ability.\n1Toughness (3): The character has hardened skin, scales, or extremely dense tissue that \nincreases his base Toughness by +1.\n1Wall Walker (1): The species may walk on vertical surfaces normally, or inverted surfaces \nat half Pace.20\nSAVAGE WORLDSCelestials & Guardians\nEmily is creating an “End of Days” campaign—angels and their champions battle demonic \nforces on a ravaged planet Earth. She decides all player characters are either celestials (angels) \nor guardians (humans), and will have +4 points of racial abilities instead of the usual +2.\nEmily wants to make her angels fairly iconic. They’re tough, have wings, and call forth miracles. \nShe gives them Faith at d6 (2 points), Flight (4), and Arcane Background (Miracles) (2 points for the \nEdge). That’s 8 points and she needs to get down to +4, so she needs 4 points of negative racial abilities. \nCelestials are responsible for the meek and must fight the legions of Hell, so she gives them a Vow \n(Major—Protect humanity) for −2 points and Racial Enemy (Demons & Devils) for −1 point. She \nfinishes with All Thumbs for −1, Emily figures angels don’t really get technology.\nEmily’s guardians are human champions who fight the “Infernals.” These are humans, so she \nstarts with Adaptable (2 points). They’re also hardened survivors of the End Times, so they also \nget Attribute Increase (Vigor) for another two points. Emily then gives them the Champion Edge (2 \npoints) since they serve the celestials, and the same Vow (Major—Protect humanity) for −2 points to \nbalance everything back to +4.\nneGatiVe ra CiaL aBiLitieS\nVALUE ABILITY\n−2/–3Attribute Penalty (Once per Attribute): One attribute (but not its linked skills) suffers a –1 \npenalty. For 3 points, it suffers a –2 penalty. If Strength, this applies to damage as well.\n−2Big (1): The race is particularly large in a world where most others aren’t. He subtracts 2 from \nTrait rolls when using equipment that wasn’t specifically designed for his race and cannot \nwear their armor or clothing. Equipment, food, and clothing cost double the listed price.\n−1Cannot Speak (1): The race has no vocal cords or cannot form the sounds made by most \nother races. He can communicate with members of his own race naturally (through \nsong, pheromones, body language, etc.). Other races can’t speak his “language” but may \nlearn to understand him if they take the proper Language skill. The species can hear and \nunderstand other typical languages and may communicate via electronic devices or the like.\n−2Dependency (1): The race must consume or have contact with some sort of relatively common \nsubstance for an hour out of every 24. Creatures from water-based worlds, for example, might \nneed to immerse themselves in water; plant people might need sunlight. Without the required \ncontact, a character becomes Fatigued each day until Incapacitated. A day after that, they \nperish. Each hour spent recovering with the appropriate substance restores a level of Fatigue.\n−1Environmental Weakness (U): The race suffers a –4 penalty to resist a particular \nenvironmental effect, such as heat, cold, etc. If the being suffers an attack based on that \nform, the penalty acts as a bonus to damage.\n−1 Frail (2): The creature is less durable than most. Reduce its Toughness by 1.\n−1/–2Hindrance (U): The race has an inherent Minor Hindrance for 1 point, or a Major Hindrance \nfor 2. This doesn’t affect the ability to choose other Hindrances during character creation.\n−1 Poor Parry (3): These beings are poor melee defenders; –1 Parry.\n−1Racial Enemy (U): This species dislikes another species relatively common to the setting. \nThey suffer a –2 penalty to Persuasion rolls when dealing with their rivals and may become \nhostile with little provocation. This may only be taken once per race.\n−1Reduced Core Skills (5): This race starts with one less core skill. The skill may be gained \nnormally but does not start at a d4. This may be taken once per core skill affected.\n−1/–2Reduced Pace (1): For –1 point, reduce Pace by 1 and the running die a die type (d4 is reduced \nto d4–1). For –2 points, reduce Pace another 2 points and subtract 2 from Athletics and rolls \nto resist Athletics where movement and mobility are integral to the challenge (GM’s call).\n−1Size –1 (1): The entity is smaller than average, reducing its Size and Toughness by 1 (see the \nSize Table, page 179).\n−1/–2Skill Penalty (Once per Skill): The race suffers a –1 penalty to a very commonly used \nskill such as Fighting, Persuasion, or even Piloting in a game focused on airplanes (the GM \ndecides based on her campaign). If the skill is less common or only comes up in certain \nsituations, the penalty is −2. For 2 points, the penalty is −2/−4 instead.\n21 CharaC ter SCelestials\nAngels are a great and varied lot, but all have these traits in common.\n \x84ALL THUMBS:  Celestials are not accustomed to technology or machines.\n \x84ARCANE BACKGROUND (Miracles ): Celestials can call forth a variety of blessed miracles.\n \x84FAITH:  All celestials start with a d6 in Faith. This increases their maximum to d12 + 1.\n \x84FLIGHT: Angels fly at Pace 12.\n \x84RACIAL ENEMY (Demons & Devils ): Those who descend from above do not easily tolerate \nthose who crawl forth from the Abyss.\n \x84VOW ( Major—Protect humanity ): The blessed must protect the flock that remains on the \nravaged Earth.\nGuardians\nThose humans who serve the Heavenly Choir are called guardians.\n \x84ADAPTABLE:  Guardians begin play with any Novice Edge of their choosing (meeting its \nRequirements as usual).\n \x84CHAMPIONS:  Guardians have the Champion Edge, giving \nthem a +2 bonus to damage against supernaturally \nevil foes such as demons and \ndevils.\n \x84VIGOROUS:  Those humans \nwho have inherited this \nblasted Earth start the game \nwith a d6 Vigor instead of \na d4. This increases their \nVigor maximum to d12 + 1.\n \x84VOW ( Major—Protect \nhumanity ): The blessed \nmust protect the remain-\ning flock on Earth.\n“Not ready to be an angel \nyet, but I so wanna play this!”\n—Red\n22\nSAVAGE WORLDSHindrances\nHindrances are character flaws and physical \nhandicaps that occasionally make life a little \ntougher for your hero.\nSome Hindrances have actual game \neffects. Other, more subjective “roleplaying” \nHindrances help you understand and roleplay \nyour character. They should occasionally \ncause her to act in ways that aren’t necessarily \nsmart, efficient, or in the best interests of \nthe party or the overall goal. That’s what \nroleplaying games are all about, and the GM \nshould reward you with Bennies when your \nHindrances cause significant trouble.All Thumbs (Minor)\nDue to upbringing, lack of exposure, or \npure bad luck, some individuals are “all \nthumbs” when it comes to mechanical or \ntechnological devices.\nAll Thumbs inflicts a −2 penalty when using \nmechanical or electrical devices. If he rolls a \nCritical Failure while using such a device \n(and it doesn’t already have a built-in effect), \nit’s broken. If the GM feels it’s appropriate, it \ncan be fixed with a Repair roll and 1d6 hours.\nAnemic (Minor)\nAnemic characters are particularly susceptible \nto sickness, disease, environmental effects, \nand fatigue. They subtract 2 from Vigor rolls \nmade to resist Fatigue (see Hazards, starting \non page 125).\nArrogant (Major)\nYour hero doesn’t think he’s the best—he \nknows he is. Whether it’s swordsmanship, \nkung fu, or painting, few compare to his skills \nand he flaunts it every chance he gets.\nWinning isn’t enough for this champion. \nHe wants to dominate his opponent and \nprove there’s no one better. He’s the kind of \nfighter who disarms an opponent in a duel \njust to pick the sword up and hand it back \nwith a smirk. Arrogant individuals look for \nthe greatest threat in battle, hacking their way \nthrough lesser minions only because they’re \nin the way.\nBad Eyes (Minor or Major)\nYour hero’s eyes aren’t what they used to \nbe. He suffers a −1 penalty to any Trait roll \ndependent on vision (such as ranged attacks \nand Notice rolls) or −2 as a Major Hindrance.\nIn settings where glasses are available, \nthey negate the penalty when worn. If lost \nor broken during a combat (generally a \n50% chance when he’s Wounded, falls, or \nsuffers some other trauma), the character \nis Distracted (and Vulnerable if a Major \nHindrance) until the end of their next turn.\nBad Luck (Major)\nYour hero is a little less lucky than most. He \ngets one less Benny per game session than \nnormal. A character cannot have both Bad \nLuck and the Luck Edge.\nGabe\nNate always plays “Gabe,” \na no-nonsense tough guy \nwith a gruff exterior but \na heart of pure gold.\nIn advanced settings he’s \ntech-savvy. In fantasy games \nhe’s usually a knight or \nwarrior of some sort.23 CharaC ter SBig Mouth (Minor)\nLoose lips sink ships, the saying goes. This \nhero’s mouth could drown an armada.\nThe blabbermouth can’t keep a secret very \nwell. He reveals plans and gives away things \nbest kept among friends, usually at the worst \npossible times.\nBlind (Major)\nThe individual is completely without sight. \nHe suffers a −6 to all physical tasks that \nrequire vision (GM’s call). On the plus side, \nBlind characters gain their choice of a free \nEdge to compensate for this particularly \ndifficult Hindrance.\nBloodthirsty (Major)\nYour hero never takes prisoners unless \nunder the direct supervision of a superior. \nHis cold-blooded ruthlessness causes \nenemies to respond in kind, often costs \nvital information, creates constant \nenemies, and may get him in trouble \nwith his superiors or the authorities, \ndepending on the setting.\nCan’t Swim (Minor)\nMost people in the 21st century can \nswim thanks to swimming pools, \neasy travel to lakes and beaches, or \neducational efforts. Historically, how-\never, those who weren’t raised around \na temperate body of water could not.\nCharacters with this Hindrance \nsuffer a −2 penalty to the Athletics \nskill when swimming and each inch \nmoved in water costs 3″ of Pace. See \nMovement (page 92) for more \ndetails and Drowning (page 126).\nCautious (Minor)\nThis planner personifies restraint \nand carefulness. He never makes \nrash decisions and likes to plot \nthings out in detail long before \nany action is taken.\nClueless (Major)\nYour hero doesn’t pay much \nattention to the world around \nhim and can’t seem to find \na haystack in a small pile \nof needles.He suffers a −1 penalty to Common Know-\nledge and Notice rolls.\nClumsy (Major)\nYour hero is an uncoordinated klutz who trips \nover air and is always the last one picked for \nsports. He subtracts 2 from Athletics and \nStealth rolls.\nCode of Honor (Major)\nHonor is very important to your character. \nHe keeps his word, doesn’t abuse or kill \nprisoners, and generally tries to operate \nwithin his world’s particular notion of proper \ngentlemanly or ladylike behavior.\nCurious (Major)\nIt killed the cat, and it might kill \nyour warrior as well. Curious \ncharacters have to check out \neverything and always want to \nknow what’s behind a potential \nmystery or secret.\nDeath Wish (Minor)\nHaving a death wish doesn’t \nmean your adventurer is \nsuicidal—he might just think \nhis life is worth less than some \nnoble but clearly deadly goal.\nThose with a Death Wish \ndon’t throw their lives away for \nno reason, but when there’s a \nchance to complete a goal they \ndo anything—and take any \nrisk—to achieve it.\nDelusional (Minor or Major)\nYour hero believes something \nthat is considered quite \nstrange by everyone else. Minor \nDelusions are harmless or the \ncharacter generally keeps it to himself \n(the government puts sedatives in \nsoft drinks, dogs can talk, we’re all just \ncharacters in some bizarre game, etc.).\nWith a Major Delusion, he expresses \nhis view on the situation frequently \nand it can occasionally lead to danger \n(the government is run by aliens, \nhospitals are deadly, I’m allergic \nto armor, zombies are my friends).\n24\nSAVAGE WORLDSDoubting Thomas (Minor)\nSome people don’t believe in the supernatural \nuntil they’re halfway down some creature’s \ngullet. Doubting Thomases are skeptics who \ntry their best to rationalize supernatural \nevents. They walk right into danger they don’t \nbelieve in and look for alternate explanations \nto every supernatural event.\nEven after being confronted with undeniable \ntruth, the doubter’s mind eventually begins \nto doubt what he saw, rationalizes it away, or \ncompartmentalizes the event as “one of a kind” \nwhile continuing to doubt the next mystery.\nDriven (Minor or Major)\nA vow is a commitment to others. Driven \ncharacters want something for themselves. It \nmay be to protect the realm, become a deco-\nrated officer, prove you’re the best gladiator \nin Rome, or the best pilot in the galactic fleet.\nThe Minor version shapes the character and \npushes his decisions but either happens rarely \nor is fairly harmless. As a Major Hindrance \nit’s an overriding desire that comes up \nfrequently or causes peril for the heroine and \nthose around her.\nElderl y (Major)\nYour adventurer is getting on in years, but he’s \nnot quite ready for the nursing home yet. His \nPace is reduced by 1, and he subtracts 1 from \nrunning rolls (minimum 1). He also suffers \na −1 penalty to Agility, Strength (including \ndamage), and Vigor rolls, but not linked skills.\nOn the plus side, the wisdom of his years \ngrants the hero 5 extra skill points which may \nbe used for any skills linked to Smarts.\nEnemy (Minor or Major)\nSomeone out there hates the character and \nwants him ruined, locked away, or dead. \nThe value of the Hindrance depends on how \npowerful the enemy is and how often he might \nshow up. A Minor Enemy might be a lone \ngunslinger out for vengeance or a betrayed \nbrotherhood that’s deadly but appears rarely. \nA Major Enemy might represent powerful \nauthorities, a band of outlaws, or a single very \npowerful and relentless rival.\nIf the enemy is one day defeated, the GM \nshould gradually work in a replacement, \nor the hero may buy off the Hindrance by \nsacrificing an Advance.Greedy (Minor or Major)\nA miser measures worth in material \npossessions or wealth. If a Minor Hindrance, \nhe argues bitterly for more than his fair share \nof any loot or reward the party might come \nacross. As a Major Hindrance, he fights \nover anything he considers unfair, and may \neven kill for it if he feels slighted or covets \nsomething he cannot have.\nHabit (Minor or Major)\nYour warrior has an annoying or dangerous \ncompulsion. A Minor Habit irritates those \naround her but isn’t dangerous. Maybe she \npicks her nose, can’t stop fiddling with her \nphone, says “y’know” in the middle of every \nsentence, or chews and smacks her gum \nloudly and often. Allies avoid her if possible.\nA Major Habit is a physical or mental \naddiction of some sort that is debilitating \nor possibly even deadly. This includes drug \nuse, chronic drinking, or perhaps even \nan addiction to virtual reality in a high-\ntech setting.\nAn addict who doesn’t get his fix must make \na Vigor roll every 24 hours he goes without or \ntake a level of Fatigue  (see page 100). \nOnce every 24 hours, a Healing roll with \nsome sort of appropriate medicine removes \none level of Fatigue for four hours. After that \nthe Fatigue returns and can only be recovered \nwith the addicting substance.\nHard of Hearing (Minor or Major)\nCharacters who have lost some or all of their \nhearing have this disadvantage. As a Minor \nHindrance, it subtracts 4 from all Notice \nrolls made to hear, including awaking due \nto loud noises. A Major Hindrance means \nthe character is deaf. She cannot hear and \nautomatically fails all Notice rolls that \ndepend on hearing.\nHearing aids reduce the penalty by 2, but \nrequire batteries and have a 50% chance of \nfalling out when he’s Wounded, falls, or \nsuffers some other trauma.\nHeroic (Major)\nThis noble soul never says no to a person in \nneed. She doesn’t have to be happy about it, \nbut she always comes to the rescue of those \nshe feels can’t help themselves. She’s the first 25 CharaC ter Sone to run into a burning building, usually \nagrees to hunt monsters for little or no pay, \nand is generally a pushover for a sob story.\nHesitant (Minor)\nYour hero hesitates in stressful situations. \nDraw two Action Cards in combat and act \non the lowest. If you draw a Joker, use it \nnormally and ignore the Hindrance for the \nround (hence this being a Minor Hindrance, \nit actually increases your chances of \ndrawing a Joker!)\nHesitant characters cannot take the Quick \nor Level Headed Edges.\nIlliterate (Minor)\nYour hero cannot read. He can sign his \nname and knows what a STOP sign says, \nbut little else. He also doesn’t know much \nabout math. He can probably do 2\u2009+\u20092\u2009=\u20094, but \nmultiplication and the like are beyond him.\nIlliterate characters can’t read or write in \nany language, by the way, no matter how \nmany they actually speak.\nImpulsive (Major)\nThe daredevil almost always leaps before he \nlooks. He rarely thinks things through before \ntaking action.\nJealous (Minor or Major)\nInsecurity leads to envy of others’ accomplish-\nments or being overly possessive of what \nthis disgruntled soul feels belongs to him. \nHe often complains, pouts, covets others’ \npossessions or accolades, claims credit for \nanother’s work, disobeys commands, and \ngenerally causes problems.\nAs a Minor Hindrance, the character’s \njealousy is focused on one particular subject \n(such as his “unrivaled” skill as a pilot or a \nromantic interest).\nAs a Major Hindrance, the character is \njealous of anyone and everyone he feels \noutshines him. He consistently bad-mouths \nhis rivals, tries to upstage them, or actively \nplots to discredit those who threaten his ego.\nLoyal (Minor)\nThis stalwart defender risks her life for her \nfriends without hesitation. Some Loyal \nheroes may not act that way, but are the first to come to their friends’ rescue when they’re \nthreatened.\nMean (Minor)\nThis curmudgeon is ill-tempered and \ndisagreeable. He has trouble doing anything \nkind for anyone else, must be paid for his \ntroubles, and doesn’t accept awards or favors \ngraciously. Besides the obvious roleplaying \nissues, Mean characters subtract 1 from \nPersuasion rolls.\nMild Mannered (Minor)\nYour milquetoast just isn’t threatening. \nMaybe he’s a little doughy around the middle, \nhas a kind face, or a soft voice. Whatever the \nissue, he has a hard time looking tough. He \nsubtracts 2 when making Intimidation rolls.\nMute (Major)\nDue to trauma or birth, your character has lost \nthe ability to speak. He can write messages \nto others when needed, use sign language, or \nsome combination of visual communication.\nVison-based communication may require a \nNotice roll to perceive correctly (illumination \nand similar penalties apply).\nObese (Minor)\nThose who carry their weight well have the \nBrawny Edge. Those who don’t are Obese. A \ncharacter cannot be both Brawny and Obese, \nand this Hindrance can’t increase your \nSize above +3.\nAn Obese hero’s Size (and therefore \nToughness) increase by +1. His Pace is \nreduced by 1, and his running die one die \ntype (minimum d4). Strength is considered \none die type less (minimum d4) for armor \nand worn gear (not weapons). They may also \nhave difficulty finding armor or clothing that \nfits or entering confined spaces.\nObligation (Minor or Major)\nYour hero has a responsibility she must attend \nto on a daily or regular basis. It could be a \njob, volunteer work, taking care of family or \nfriends, etc.\nThe Obligation consumes about 20 hours \nmost weeks, or 40+ for the Major version. \nExactly what that entails should be discussed \nbetween the player and the Game Master.26\nSAVAGE WORLDSOne Arm (Major)\nBy birth or battle, your hero has lost an arm. \nFortunately, his other arm is (now) his “good” \none. Tasks that require two hands, such as \nsome Athletics rolls (GM’s call) or using a \ntwo-handed weapon, suffer a −4 modifier.\nOne Eye (Major)\nThis veteran lost an eye and has trouble with \ndepth perception. He subtracts 2 from any \nTrait roll dependent on vision and more than \n5″ (10 yards) distant.\nOutsider (Minor or Major)\nIn a society made up of only a few types of \npeople, your hero isn’t one of them. A Native \nAmerican in a Western town, an alien in a \nscifi game of human marines, or a half-orc in \na party of elves, dwarves, and humans are all \nexamples. Locals are likely to raise prices on \nher, ignore pleas for help, and generally treat \nher as lower class.\nOutsiders subtract 2 from Persuasion \nrolls made to influence those who aren’t her \nown kind. The Major version also means \nthe character has few or no legal rights in \nthe main campaign area. She might be a \ndifferent species among xenophobes, the \ncivilization may be cruel and unenlightened \ntoward strangers, or she might even be an \nartificial intelligence whose sapience isn’t \nacknowledged by the law.\nOverconfident (Major)\nThere’s nothing out there your hero can’t \ndefeat. At least that’s what he thinks. He \nbelieves he can do most anything and never \nwants to retreat from a challenge. He’s not \nsuicidal, but he certainly takes on more than \ncommon sense dictates.\nPacifist (Minor or Major)\nYour hero absolutely despises violence. Minor \npacifism means he only fights when given no \nother choice and never allows the killing of \nprisoners or other defenseless victims.\nMajor Pacifists won’t fight living characters \nunder any circumstances. They may defend \nthemselves, but won’t do anything to \npermanently harm sapient, living creatures. \nThey may use nonlethal methods (see page \n104), but only in self-defense or the defense \nof others.Note that undeniably evil creatures, undead, \ndemons, and the like are fair game even for \nMajor Pacifists!\nPhobia (Minor or Major)\nPhobias are overwhelming and irrational \nfears that plague a hero’s psyche.\nWhenever a character is in the presence of \nhis phobia (GM’s call, but generally sight), \nhe subtracts 1 from all his Trait rolls if it’s a \nMinor Hindrance, and 2 if it’s Major.\nPhobias shouldn’t be too obvious; everyone \nshould be afraid of vampires, for example, so \nit’s not a phobia, it’s common sense. Instead, \nthe phobia usually centers on some random \nelement the mind associates with the event. \nRemember, phobias are irrational  fears.\nPoverty (Minor)\nIt’s said a fool and his money are soon parted. \nYour hero is one of them. He starts with half \nthe usual money for your setting and just \ncan’t seem to hang on to funds acquired after \nplay begins. In general, the player halves his \ntotal funds every game week.\nQuirk (Minor)\nThis individual has some minor foible that is \nusually humorous but can occasionally cause \nhim real trouble. A swashbuckler may always \ntry to slash his initials on his foes, a dwarf \nmay brag constantly about his culture, or a \nsnobby débutante might not eat, drink, or \nsocialize with the lower class, for example.\nRuthless (Minor or Major)\nThe fanatic will do most anything to \naccomplish her goals. As a Major Hindrance, \nshe harms anyone and everyone who gets in \nher way. As a Minor Hindrance, she stops \nshort of true harm to anyone except those \nwho directly oppose her.\nSecret (Minor or Major)\nYour hero has a secret she keeps to protect \nherself or others. As a Minor Hindrance, the \nsecret is troublesome but not life-threatening. \nThe Major version would cause severe \nproblems if discovered. If it ever becomes \npublic knowledge, she should trade it \nfor Enemy, Shamed, Wanted, or another \nappropriate Hindrance approved by the GM. 27 CharaC ter S\nShamed (Minor or Major)\nSomething haunts your adventurer. Maybe \nhe made a vow he didn’t keep. Maybe he was \ndefeated in an honorable fight and ordered \nthe death of his foe anyway for some greater \nprinciple. Maybe he isn’t actually cowardly \nbut once ran from a battle and left others to die.\nAs a Minor Hindrance, the shameful \ncircumstances aren’t generally known—it \njust haunts the hero. He might go out of his \nway, against all reason, not to repeat the \nmistake. Or he might give in to the same set \nof circumstances and hate himself for it.\nAs a Major Hindrance, his deed is well-\nknown—or at least known among those \nhe cares about. The other player characters \nshould be told the tale as soon as possible \n(preferably at character creation). If not, it \nshould be revealed by nonplayer characters \nat some point, and occasionally used \nagainst the hero.\nSlow (Minor or Major)\nA disability or past injury has hindered \nthis hero’s mobility. As a Minor Hindrance, \nreduce his Pace by 1 and his running die one \nstep (if already d4, reduce to d4−1). As a \nMajor Hindrance, reduce the running die a \nstep, Pace by 2, and subtract 2 from Athletics \nrolls and rolls to resist Athletics (such as Tests \nor Grappling).\nSlow characters may not take the Fleet-\nFooted Edge.Prosthesis: A character with the Minor \nversion of this Hindrance may have a \nprosthesis. If the prosthesis is lost, he suffers \nthe effects of the Major version of Slow. \nWheelchairs: From about the Victorian \nera forward, Slow heroes may start with a \nmanual wheelchair at no cost. In the modern \nera (1980s and on), the character may also \nchoose from an ultralight or powered chair.\nAll wheelchairs require reasonably smooth \nground to operate (GM’s call).\n \x84MANUAL:  Pace is half Athletics die (max of \n3) and cannot run.\n \x84ULTRALIGHT:  Pace is half Athletics die and \nmay run at d4 (Minor) or d4−1 (Major).\n \x84POWERED:  Pace 6 on flat, even ground, \nPace 3 on uneven ground, cannot run. \nMost powered chairs can go about 10 miles \nbefore requiring a recharge.\nSmall (Minor)\nThis adventurer is very skinny, very short, or \nboth. His Size (see page 106) is reduced by 1, \nwhich reduces his Toughness as well.\nSize can’t be reduced below −1, but the \nToughness penalty remains. A Small half-folk, \nfor example, remains Size −1 and loses a point \nof Toughness.\nStubborn (Minor)\nStubborn individuals always want their way \nand never admit they’re wrong. Even when \nit’s painfully obvious they’ve made a mistake \n28\nSAVAGE WORLDSthey try to justify it with half-truths and \nrationalizations.\nSuspicious (Minor or Major)\nYour character is suspicious of everyone. \nAs a Minor Hindrance, his paranoia causes \nfrequent trust issues. He might demand full \npayment before doing a task, want every \nagreement in writing, or believe even his \nfriends are out to get him.\nAs a Major Hindrance, Support rolls to aid \nthe distrustful individual are made at −2.\nThin Skinned (Minor or Major)\nPersonal attacks really get under this \nindividual’s skin. As a Minor Hindrance, he \nsubtracts 2 when resisting Taunt attacks. As \na Major, he subtracts 4.\nTongue- Tied (Major)\nYour adventurer flubs cool lines (or thinks of \nthem afterwards!), goes off on tangents when \nhe’s trying to talk someone into something, \nand generally miscommunicates most \neverything he says.\nHe suffers a −1 penalty to Intimidation, \nPerformance, Persuasion, and Taunt rolls that \ninvolve speech.\nUgl y (Minor or Major)\nAttractive people get all the breaks. This \nunfortunate individual isn’t one of them. He \nsubtracts 1 from his Persuasion rolls, or 2 if \ntaken as a Major Hindrance.\nVengeful (Minor or Major)\nPayback is…well…bad news for someone, \nand this adventurer is going to get it.\nAs a Minor Hindrance she usually seeks \nvengeance legally. The method varies by \nsituation. Some plot and scheme for months \nwhile others demand immediate results.\nThose with the Major version of this \nHindrance don’t let anything prevent them \nfrom a reckoning. This doesn’t mean they \nimmediately resort to violence, but their \nactions always escalate until total and \ncomplete satisfaction is achieved.\nVow (Minor or Major)\nThe character has sworn an oath to someone \nor something he believes in.The danger in fulfilling the Vow and how \noften it might occur determines the level of \nthe Hindrance. A Minor Vow might be to \nserve an order with a broad mandate that \nrarely conflicts with the party’s goals.\nA Major Vow makes long-term and frequent \ndemands on the servant’s time and results in \ngreat risks to his life.\nWanted (Minor or Major)\nYour hero has committed some crime and will \nbe arrested if discovered by the authorities. \nThis assumes the setting actually has laws \nand police officers to enforce them.\nThe level of the Hindrance depends on \nhow serious the crime was and how active \nthe hunters are. A hero with numerous \nunpaid parking tickets (in a game where \nhe might have to drive occasionally) has a \nMinor Hindrance, as does someone wanted \nfor more serious crimes away from the main \ncampaign area. Being accused of murder is \na Major Hindrance in almost any setting if \nthere’s someone around to seek justice (or \nvengeance).\nYellow (Major)\nNot everyone has ice water in their veins. \nYour hero is squeamish at the sight of blood \nand gore and terrified of coming to harm. \nHe subtracts 2 from Fear checks and when \nresisting Intimidation.\nYoung (Minor Or Major)\nThe hero is 12–15 years old (in human years—\nadjust this for other races). He has only 4 \npoints to adjust his attributes instead of 5, and \n10 skill points instead of 12. He may also have \nlegal restrictions depending on the setting \n(can’t drive, own a firearm, and so on).\nOn the plus side, youths have a fair amount \nof luck. They draw one extra Benny at the \nbeginning of each game session (this stacks \nwith other Edges such Luck or Great Luck).\nMost Young characters should also take the \nSmall Hindrance, but it’s not mandatory.\nAs a Major Hindrance, the character is Very \nYoung (8 to 11 years old). He has only 3 points \nfor attributes and 10 for skills, and the Small \nHindrance. Very Young heroes draw two \nextra Bennies at the start of each session.29 CharaC ter STraits\nCharacters are defined by their “Traits,” \nattributes and skills ranked by die types. A \nd6 is average, while higher die types reflect \nmuch greater ability.\nAttributes  are primarily passive or innate \nabilities used for resisting effects like fear \nor supernatural attacks. Skills are used to \nactively do things or affect others. \nExceptions occur, but these are the \nfoundational differences between the \ntwo concepts.\nAttributes\nAttributes don’t directly affect skill rolls. \nSavage Worlds treats learned knowledge \nand training as the most relevant and direct \nfactors. A high attribute allows one to increase \na skill faster and opens up options to Edges \nthat greatly differentiate two characters with \nthe same skill.\nEvery character starts with a d4 in each of \nfive attributes:\nAgility is a measure of a character’s nimble-\nness, dexterity, and general coordination.\nSmarts measures raw intelligence, mental \nacuity, and how fast a heroine thinks on her \nfeet. It’s used to resist certain types of mental \nand social attacks.\nSpirit is self-confidence, backbone, and \nwillpower. It’s used to resist social and \nsupernatural attacks as well as fear.\nStrength  is physical power and fitness. It’s \nalso used as the basis of a warrior’s damage in \nhand-to-hand combat, and to determine how \nmuch he can wear or carry.\nVigor represents an individual’s endurance, \nresistance to disease, poison, or toxins, and \nhow much physical damage she can take \nbefore she can’t go on. It is most often used \nto resist Fatigue effects, and as the basis for \nthe derived stat of Toughness.\nUsing Attributes\nAttributes are used to:\n• Determine how fast skills increase during \nAdvancement (page 54).\n• Limit access to Edges  (page 37).• Derive secondary statistics such as Tough-\nness or melee damage.\n• Resist effects such as being grappled or \ncounter spells, powers, or social attacks \nsuch as Taunt or Intimidation.\nSkills\nHeroes have 12 points to buy skills during \ncharacter creation. A skill that’s below \nthe linked attribute (noted in parentheses \nbeside the skill name) is cheaper to increase \nthan one that’s at or above it. See page 55 \nfor Character Creation and page 54 for \nAdvancement.\nCore skills are marked with a red star, and \nstart at d4 for player characters (see page 10).\nCharacters can attempt skills they don’t \nhave but it’s more difficult. See Unskilled \nAttempts on page 89.\nAcademics (Smarts)\nAcademics reflects knowledge of the liberal \narts, social sciences, literature, history, \narchaeology, and similar fields. If an explorer \nwants to remember when the Mayan calendar \nended or cite a line from Macbeth , this is the \nskill to have.\n \x90Athletics (Agility)\nAthletics combines an individual’s coordin-\nation with learned skills such as climbing, \njumping, balancing, biking, wrestling, skiing, \nswimming, throwing, or catching. Characters \nwho rely on physical power more than \ncoordination can take the Brute Edge (page \n38) to link this skill to Strength instead \nof Agility.\nBattle (Smarts)\nBattle is an individual’s command of strategy \nand tactics. It can be used for general military \nknowledge and is critical when commanding \ntroops in Mass Battles (see page 131).\nBoating (Agility)\nCharacters with this skill can handle most any \nboat or ship common to their setting. They \nalso know how to handle common tasks \nassociated with their vessel such as tying \nknots, rigging sails, or following currents.30\nSAVAGE WORLDS \x90Common Knowledge (Smarts)\nCharacters roll Common Knowledge to know \npeople, places, and things of their world, \nincluding etiquette, geography, culture, \npopular technology, contacts, and customs.\nDriving (Agility)\nDriving allows a hero to control any powered \nground vehicle common to his setting. This \nincludes cars, motorcycles, tanks, and the like.SKill Changes in this \nEdition of Savage Worlds\nHere’s a summary of the most important \nskill changes in this edition of Savage Worlds.\nCore Skills\nEvery hero starts with a d4 in five basic \nabilities: Athletics, Common Knowledge, \nNotice, Persuasion, and Stealth. A d4 \ndoesn’t mean they’re good at these skills, \nbut they have some basic experience with \nthem.\nMAJOR CHANGES:\n• Charisma was removed from the game.\n• Climbing has been folded into Athletics.\n• Common Knowledge is now its own \nskill rather than a Smarts roll.\n• Investigation  is now Research  to make \nits meaning and usage more clear.\n• Focus is a new skill for the Gifted Arcane \nBackground.\n• Knowledge has been broken down \ninto the separate skills used in most \ncampaigns. Specifically: Academics, \nBattle, Electronics, Hacking , Lang uage , \nOccult, and Science .\n• Lockpicking is now part of Thievery, \nwhich also handles pickpocketing, \nsleight of hand, safecracking, and other \nroguish tricks.\n• Performance is a new skill.\n• Repair and its use are better defined.\n• Streetwise is now an Edge.\n• Swimming is handled by Athletics .\n• Throwing is covered by Athletics .\n• Tracking  is now part of Survival.(Bikes and other self-powered transports use \nAthletics, beast-drawn transports use Riding.)\nCharacters in modern settings where \nvehicles are ubiquitous don’t need Driving \nfor ordinary travel. Driving rolls are typically \nonly needed in dangerous or stressful \nconditions, such as Chases (page 113).\nElectronics (Smarts)\nElectronics allows a hero to use complex or \nspecialized devices such as the control panels \non industrial machines or the sensor systems \nfound on spaceships in futuristic settings.\nConsumer or electronic devices common \nto the setting don’t require Electronics—\nCommon Knowledge suffices if a roll is \nrequired at all. In the modern world, this \napplies to video recorders, cell phones, etc.\nFixing any type of broken electronic device \nuses the Repair skill (see page 34).\nFaith (Spirit)\nFaith is the arcane skill required for \nArcane Background (Miracles) , described \non page 148.\nFighting (Agility)\nFighting covers all hand-to-hand (melee) \nattacks, whether it’s with fists, axes, laser \nswords, or martial arts. See Chapter Three for \nthe combat rules and the various maneuvers \na warrior might attempt.\nFocus (Spirit)\nFocus is the arcane skill for Arcane Background \n(Gifted), see page 148.\nGambling (Smarts)\nGambling is common in the saloons of \nthe Old West, the back rooms of criminal \norganizations, the barracks of most armies, \nor the flight decks of scifi spaceships.\nTo simulate an hour of gambling without \nhaving to roll for every single toss of the \ndice or hand of cards, have everyone agree \non the stakes, such as $10, 10 gold coins, etc. \nEveryone in the game then makes a Gambling \nroll. The lowest total pays the highest total \nthe difference times the stake. The next lowest \npays the second highest the difference times \nthe stake, and so on. If there’s an odd man left \nin the middle, he breaks even.31 CharaC ter SExample: Red rolls highest with a 10 and Gabe \nrolls lowest with a 4. The difference is 6, so Gabe \npays Red 6 × the stake of $10, or $60.\nCheating: A character who cheats adds \n+2 to his roll. The GM may raise or lower \nthis modifier depending on the particulars \nof the game or the method of cheating. If \na cheater rolls a Critical Failure, however, \nhe’s caught. The consequences depend on \nthe circumstances and who noticed, but are \nusually unpleasant!\nHacking (Smarts)\nHacking is the skill used to create programs \nand “hack” into secured systems. Use of this \nskill always requires a computer or interface \nof some sort.\nMost tasks are a simple Hacking roll. The \namount of time it takes is determined by the \nGM, from a single action to hours, days, or \neven months depending on the complexity of \nthe project. Success means the attempt works \nas desired and a raise halves the time required. \nFailure usually just means the hacker must try \nagain, while a Critical Failure may mean the \nsystem locks the user out, issues an alarm, or \nenacts another countermeasure of some sort.\nHealing (Smarts)\nHealing has multiple uses, from treating \nWounds to diagnosing diseases and analyzing \ncertain kinds of forensic evidence. \nSee page 96 for rules on mending and \ntreating Wounds, and page 128 for treatment \nof disease or poison.\nForensics: Healing can also be used to \nanalyze evidence that relates to anatomical \ntrauma, including cause and time of death, \nangle of attack, and similar matters. Success \nprovides basic information and a raise \nincreases the details uncovered.\nIntimidation (Spirit)\nIntimidation is the art of frightening an \nopponent so that he backs down, reveals \ninformation, or flees.\nIntimidation is an opposed roll resisted by \nthe opponent’s Spirit. In combat, this is a Test \n(see page 108). Out of combat, a successful \nroll means the foe backs down for the most \npart, reveals some information, or slinks \naway when the opportunity presents itself. A raise might mean he backs down for the \nremainder of the scene, spills all the beans, or \nruns away as fast as he can.\nIn or out of combat, a Critical Failure \nmeans the target is immune to this character’s \nIntimidation attempts for the remainder of \nthis encounter!\nNetworking: Intimidation can also be used \nas a “macro” skill to simulate several hours \nof working the streets. See Networking on \npage 133 to see how to crack some heads for \nfavors or information.\nLanguage (Smarts)\nIn some settings, such as those that focus on \npulp action or “planetary romance” (where \ncharacters frequently travel among many \nstrange civilizations), speaking various \nlanguages can simply be roleplayed with \nhalting dialogue and campy accents that start \nout a little difficult and are quickly forgotten. \nThe GM may ignore this skill altogether in \nthese settings, or use the Multiple Languages  \n Setting Rule on page 140.\nIn more realistic settings, communication \ncan be a major barrier that requires characters \nto put skill points into additional languages. \nIn a 1980s World War Three game, for example, \na group of United Nations paratroopers \nwon’t be able to speak with their foes unless \nthey take Russian, Polish, or other languages \ncommon to the Warsaw Pact.\nIf the Language skill is in use, it should \nbe listed as Language (Spanish), Language \n(American Sign Language), etc. A character’s \ndie type also notes how fluent he is in it. \n(Characters start with a d8 in their own \nLanguage.)\nLan GUaGe P rOFi Cien CY\nSKILL ABILITY\nd4The character can read, write, and \nspeak common words and phrases.\nd6The speaker can carry on a prolonged \nbut occasionally halting conversation.\nd8The character can speak fluently.\nd10The hero can mimic other dialects \nwithin the language.\nd12The speaker can masterfully recite \nimportant literary or oral works.32\nSAVAGE WORLDS\nCreating Other Skills\nGame Masters can create any skill they \nwant or need for their setting. If the skill \nhas defined uses, she should work out \nexactly how it functions. If navigating \nthe stars is a big part of your planetary \nromance campaign and you don’t think \nthe Electronics skill covers use of the \nnavigational systems, for example, you \nmight want to add Astrogation.\nPlayers can also add their own specialty \nskills (with the GM’s approval). These \naren’t likely to come up much in most \nsettings, however, unless the player  \nproactively looks for ways to use them.\nExample: In Deadlands: Hell on Earth, \nthe heroes must rally the town against an \napproaching mutant horde. Emily has a skill \nof her own creation, Journalism. She decides \nto use it to write an emotional article and \nprint it up for everyone in the settlement to \nread. She gets a raise and the GM decides \nthe entire town rallies to the defenders’ side.\nSkill Philosophy\nNew players sometimes focus on some \nskills being so broad—such as Fighting \nor Shooting—and trying to make all other \nskills equally so. But the primary goal of \nthe skill system is to create and support \ncharacter tropes. A shooter, whether he’s a \nsniper or a bowman, is ubiquitous across \nmany settings and all use a single ability—\nbeing able to fire weapons accurately. You \ndon’t need a skill for firearms and another \nfor bows to reinforce those character tropes.\nInvestigators do need many different \nskills, however, because they do things in \ncompletely different ways. A hard-nosed \ndetective needs Intimidation to work the \nstreets, socialites mingle with high society, \nbookworms hit the library, and computer \ngeeks use Hacking to get what they want.\nAlso, some skills just don’t make sense  \nwhen combined. You could combine \nBoating, Driving, and Piloting into \n“Vehicles,” for example, but then every \nmodern day person who can drive a car \ncould fly a plane. Consider that when \nyou’re altering skills for your campaigns.Limited:  Use whichever skill is lowest when \nperforming an action that requires knowledge \nof a foreign language. Intimidation (if verbal), \nPersuasion, Research, Taunt, etc., are all \nlimited by the character’s Language skill.\nThis limitation never applies to a character’s \nnative tongue.\n \x90Notice (Smarts)\nNotice is a hero’s general awareness and \nalertness. It’s used to sense sights, sounds, \ntastes, and smells, spot clues, detect ambushes, \nspot hidden weapons on a foe, or tell if a rival \nis lying, frightened, happy, etc.\nSuccess conveys basic information—the \ncharacter hears movement in the forest, \nsmells distant smoke, or senses someone isn’t \nbeing completely truthful.\nA raise grants more detail, such as the \ndirection of a sound or odor or what topic a \nperson is avoiding or lying about.\nOccul t (Smarts)\nOccult reflects knowledge and experience \nwith the paranormal most others don’t even \nbelieve exists. It can be used to decipher \nstrange pictograms, recall information about \nsupernatural creatures, remember cures \nfor monstrous maladies like lycanthropy or \nvampirism, or perform rituals.\nFinding information in a library, newspaper \nmorgue, old tome, the internet, etc., uses the \nResearch skill. As noted there, however, if the \ninvestigator’s Occult skill is higher she may \nuse that instead. See Research on page 34.\nPerformance (Spirit)\nA good entertainer can lift the spirits, rally a \ncrowd to action, or simply earn a few bucks \nfrom the locals. Specifics depend on the \nsituation, setting, and how well the character \nis known in the area.\nPerformance covers singing, acting, playing \nan instrument, or similar tasks that require an \naudience to appreciate.\nRaising Funds: The amount of money a \ncharacter can raise by performing is extremely \nsubjective, but as a general rule a successful \nperformance raises 20% of the setting’s \nStarting Funds with a success and 30% with \na raise. The GM can multiply this amount \nby the performer’s Rank if she feels it’s 33 CharaC ter SPiloting (Agility)\nPiloting allows a character to maneuver \nairplanes, helicopters, jet packs, or spaceships. \nRules for Chases and vehicular combat can be \nfound in Chapter Four.\nA being with the innate ability to fly (he has \nwings, for example) uses Athletics instead.\nPsionics (Smarts)\nThis is the skill “psions” or “psis” use to \nactivate and control their psionic abilities. \nSee the Arcane Background (Psionics) Edge \non page 148.appropriate. These numbers work for typical \nperformers who might be known in a small \nestablishment or area. Larger performances \ncan greatly boost the performer’s fee, but also \nrequire more time, energy, and setup.\nDeception: Performance can be used \ninstead of Persuasion if the character is \nattempting to deceive, bluff, or disguise \nherself and the GM agrees it makes sense in \nthe context of the situation.\n \x90Persuasion (Spirit)\nPersuasion is the ability to convince others to \ndo what you want through reason, cajoling, \ndeception, rewards, or other friendly means. \nPersuasion isn’t mind control. It can change \nsomeone’s attitude but not their goals. A \nbandit may let you keep a sentimental piece \nof jewelry with a good Persuasion roll but still \ntakes all your other goods.\nWhen used to Support allies (page 106) \nit’s an unopposed roll. If the target is resistant, \nit’s an opposed roll vs. the target’s Spirit. The \nGM should modify the roll as she sees fit \nbased on roleplaying, any pertinent Edges or \nHindrances that affect the conversation, and \nthe circumstances. \nReaction Level: How much a person is \nwilling to cooperate depends largely on their \nattitude toward whoever’s talking to them. \nThe Game Master can decide how nonplayer \ncharacters feel based on the setting, or roll on \nthe Reaction Table (see sidebar) if she has no \npreconceived notions.\nSuccess improves the target’s attitude one \nlevel and a raise improves it two. Further \nincreases aren’t generally possible in the \nsame encounter—it takes individuals a little \ntime to adjust their biases.\nFailure means the target won’t change his \nmind this scene or until the situation changes \nin some important way. A Critical Failure \nalso reduces the target’s attitude two levels.\nOnly one roll should generally be allowed \nper interaction unless new information is \nrevealed, a substantial reward is offered, etc. \nNetworking: Characters can also use \nPersuasion as a “macro skill,” simulating a \nfew hours or an evening’s time hobnobbing \nand socializing to gain favors or information. \nSee Networking on page 133.Reactions\nThe GM can use the table below to roll \nor choose a character or group’s initial \nattitude.\nrea Cti On taBLe\n2D6 INITIAL REACTION\n2Hostile: The target is openly hostile. \nHe may attack if possible, or other-\nwise betray, report on, or hinder \nthe party at the first opportunity. \nHe doesn’t help without an over-\nwhelming reward or threat of some \nkind.\n3Unfriendly: The character isn’t \ninterested in helping unless he \nhas little choice and/or is offered a \nsubstantial payment or reward.\n4–5Uncooperative: The target isn’t \ninterested in getting involved unless \nthere’s a significant advantage to \nhimself.\n6–8Neutral: The character has no par-\nticular attitude toward the group. \nHe expects fair payment for any sort \nof favor or information.\n9–10Cooperative: The character is gener-\nally sympathetic. He helps if he can \nfor a small fee, favor, or kindness.\n11Friendly: The individual goes out of \nhis way for the hero. He likely does \nsimple tasks for very little, and is \nwilling to do more dangerous tasks \nfor fair pay or other favors.\n12Helpful: The target is anxious to \nhelp the hero and probably does so \nfor little or no reward.'